Automation Debugging | Initial Guidance + `with_log!` Refman Entry (#15)
SkyLabsAI/auto-docs: content/docs/common_errors/automation_debugging.md

<h2 id="start-here">Start here</h2>

- [Read the proof state first](#read-the-state-before-the-traces):
  identify the missing proof step before reaching for traces.
- [Follow the diagnosis loop](#core-workflow):
  explain the local state first, then widen to deeper candidate causes only as
  needed.
- [Jump to trace commands when needed](../../../reference/skylabs.auto/):
  use the reference page once the state alone is no longer explanatory.

<h2 id="where-this-fits">Where this fits</h2>

Rocq already provides several automation layers for ordinary proof work:

- [`auto`](https://rocq-prover.org/doc/master/refman/proofs/automatic-tactics/auto.html)
  and related proof search
- [typeclass search and `typeclasses eauto`](https://rocq-prover.org/doc/master/refman/addendum/type-classes.html)
- solver-style tactics such as `lia`, `nia`, and related automation in the
  Rocq ecosystem

SkyLabs automation sits on top of that broader landscape for BRiCk-specific
reasoning about separation logic, weakest preconditions, and proof-state
normalization. It is also user-extensible: custom abstractions and
representations can be connected to the automation with local hints and related

> mechanisms. See [Rep hints](../rep_hints/main.v) for one concrete entrypoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
representations can be connected to the automation with type class instances and
other hints. See [Rep hints](../rep_hints/main.v) for one concrete entry point.
```

## When to use this

Use this page when:

- automation stops making progress in a way the current goal does not explain
- a tactic call changes the proof state in a surprising or incorrect way
- the resulting goals suggest that useful information was lost or instantiated
  badly
- you need to decide whether the blocker is a missing hint, a blocked side
  condition, the wrong search phase, or a non-automation issue

Do not start here if ordinary automation is still making routine progress. Let
it run until the state becomes informative enough to diagnose.

<h2 id="core-workflow">Core workflow</h2>

1. stop at the first genuinely informative stuck or degraded state
2. state what you expected the next proof step to be, then identify what
   transition actually happened instead
3. inspect traces only once the local state itself is no longer explanatory
4. test the smallest local fix that could confirm or refute the suspected cause
   before widening scope

Sometimes this shows that the issue is not automation at all. The real problem
may be a [proof-strategy issue](./proof_strategy_gotchas.md), a specification

> or rep-predicate issue, or a plain bug in the model or code.

Reviewer: This process can identify issues in the automation but it can also identify errors in our 
specification or code or the shortcomings of our [proof strategy](./proof_strategy_gotchas.md).

<h2 id="read-the-state-before-the-traces">Read the state before the traces</h2>

> Start from the missing proof step visible in the current goal, not from the raw

Reviewer: A missing proof step has not been mentioned yet. 

We may want to introduce the notion with something like:

> When the automation gets unexpectedly stuck, there is often one (or more) obviously right thing(s) to do next that the automation has either not attempted or not succeeded in doing. We start our investigation by stating what that step is.
